28.
Every object in the next day's journey was new and interesting to Elizabeth, and her
spirits were in a state of enjoyment, for she had seen her sister looking so well as
to banish all fear for her health, and the prospect of her northern tour was a constant
source of delight.
When they left the high road for the lane to Huntsford, every eye was in search of the
parsonage, and every turning expected to bring it in view.
The palings of Rosings Park was their boundary on one side.
Elizabeth smiled at the recollection of all that she had heard of its inhabitants.
At length the parsonage was discernible.
The garden sloping to the road, the house standing in it, the green pails, and the laurel
hedge, everything declared they were arriving.
Mr. Collins and Charlotte appeared at the door, and the carriage stopped at the small
gate, which led by a short gravel walk to the house, admits the nods and smiles of
the whole party.
In a moment they were all out of the chase, in rejoicing at the sight of each other.
Mrs. Collins welcomed her friend with the liveliest pleasure, and Elizabeth was more
and more satisfied with coming when she found herself so affectionately received.
She saw instantly that her cousin's manners were not altered by his marriage.
His formal civility was just what it had been, and he detained her some minutes at the gate
to hear and satisfy his inquiries after all her family.
They were then with no other delay than his pointing out the neatness of the entrance
taken into the house, and as soon as they were in the parlour he welcomed them a second
time, with ostentatious formality to his humble abode, and punctually repeated all his wife's
offers of refreshment.
Elizabeth was prepared to see him in his glory, and she could not help in fancying that in
displaying the good proportion of the room, its aspect, and its furniture, he addressed
himself particularly to her as if wishing to make her feel what she had lost in refusing
him.
But though everything seemed neat and comfortable, she was not able to gratify him by any sigh
of repentance, and rather looked with wonder at her friend that she could have so cheerful
an air with such a companion.
When Mr. Collins said anything of which his wife might reasonably be ashamed, which certainly
was not unseldom, she involuntarily turned her eye to Charlotte.
Once or twice she could discern a faint blush, but in general Charlotte wisely did not hear.
After sitting long enough to admire every article of furniture in the room, from the
sideboard to the fender, to give an account of their journey, and of all that had happened
in London, Mr. Collins invited them to take a stroll in the garden, which was large and
well laid out, and to the cultivation of which he attended himself.
To work in this garden was one of his most respectable pleasures, and Elizabeth admired
the command of countenance with which Charlotte talked of the healthfulness of the exercise,
and owned she encouraged it as much as possible.
Here leading the way through every walk and crosswalk, and scarcely allowing them an interval
to utter the praises he asked for, every view was pointed out with a minuteness which left
beauty entirely behind.
He could number the fields in every direction, and could tell how many trees there were in
the most distant clump, but of all the views which his garden, or which the country or
kingdom could boast, none were to be compared with a prospect of rosings, afforded by an
opening in the trees that bordered the park nearly opposite the front of his house.
It was a handsome modern building, well situated on rising ground.
From his garden Mr. Collins would have fled them round his two meadows, but the ladies
not having shoes to encounter the remains of a white frost turned back, and while Sir
William accompanied him, Charlotte took her sister and friend over the house, extremely
well pleased probably, to have the opportunity of showing out without her husband's help.
It was rather small but well built and convenient, and everything was fitted up and arranged
with a neatness and consistency of which Elizabeth gave Charlotte all the credit.
When Mr. Collins could be forgotten, there was really an air of great comfort throughout,
and by Charlotte's evident enjoyment of it, Elizabeth supposed he must be often forgotten.
She had already learnt that Lady Catherine was still in the country.
It was spoken of again while they were at dinner, when Mr. Collins, joining in, observed,
Yes, Miss Elizabeth, you will have the honour of seeing Lady Catherine de Bourgh on the
ensuing Sunday at church, and I need not say you will be delighted with her.
She is all affability and condescension, and I doubt not but you will be honoured with
portion of her notice when service is over.
I have scarcely any hesitation in saying she will include you and my sister Mariah in every
invitation with which she honours us during your stay here.
Her behaviour to my dear Charlotte is charming.
We dine at Rosings twice every week and are never allowed to walk home.
Her ladyship's carriage is regularly ordered for us.
I should say one of her ladyship's carriages, for she has several.
Lady Catherine is a very respectable, sensible woman indeed, added Charlotte, and a most
attentive neighbour.
Very true, my dear, that is exactly what I say.
She is the sort of woman whom one cannot regard with too much deference.
The evening was spent cheerfully in taking over Hurtfisher News and telling again what
had already been written, and when it closed, Elizabeth, in the solitude of her chamber,
had to meditate upon Charlotte's degree of contentment, to understand her addressing
in guiding and composure in bearing with her husband, and to acknowledge that it was all
done very well.
She had also to anticipate how her visit would pass, the quiet tenor of their usual employments,
the vexatious interruptions of Mr. Collins, and the gaieties of their intercourse with
Rosings.
A lively imagination soon settled it all.
About the middle of the next day, as she was in her room getting ready for a walk, a sudden
noise below seemed to speak the whole house in confusion, and after listening a moment,
she heard somebody running upstairs in a violent hurry and calling loudly after her.
She opened the door and met Maria in the landing place, who breathless with agitation cried
out, Oh, my dear Eliza, pray make haste and come into the dining room, for there is such
a sight to be seen.
I will not tell you what it is, make haste and come down this moment.
Elizabeth asked questions in vain.
Maria would tell her nothing more, and down they ran into the dining room, which fronted
the lane in quest of this wonder.
It was two ladies stopping in a low fayton at the garden gate.
And is this all? cried Elizabeth.
I expected at least that the pigs were got into the garden, and here is nothing but Lady
Catherine and her daughter.
La, my dear, said Maria, quite shocked at the mistake.
It is not Lady Catherine.
The old lady is Mrs. Jenkinson, who lives with them.
The other is Miss de Bourgh.
Only look at her.
She is quite a little creature.
Who would have thought that she could be so thin and small?
She is abominably rude to keep Charlotte out of doors in all this wind.
Why does she not come in?
Oh, Charlotte says she hardly ever does.
It is the greatest of favours when Miss de Bourgh comes in.
I like her appearance, said Elizabeth, struck with other ideas.
She looks sickly and cross.
She will do for him very well.
She will make him a very proper wife.
Mr. Collins and Charlotte were both standing at the gate in conversation with the ladies,
and Sir William, to Elizabeth's high diversion, was stationed in the doorway in earnest contemplation
of the greatness before him, and constantly bowing whenever Miss de Bourgh looked that
way.
At length there was nothing more to be said.
The ladies drove on, and the others returned to the house.
Mr. Collins no sooner saw the two girls than he began to congratulate them on their good
which Charlotte explained by letting them know that the whole party was asked to dine
at Rosings the next day.
Mr. Collins's triumph in consequence of this invitation was complete.
The power of displaying the grandeur of his patroness to his wandering visitors, and of
letting them see her civility towards himself and his wife was exactly what he had wished
for, and that an opportunity of doing it should be given so soon was such an instance of Lady
Catherine's condescension, as he knew not how to admire enough.
I confess, said he, that I should not have been at all surprised by her ladyships asking
us on Sunday to drink tea and spending the evening at Rosings.
I rather expected from my knowledge of her affability that it would happen.
But who could have foreseen such an attention as this?
Who could have imagined that we should receive an invitation to dine there, an invitation
moreover including the whole party, so immediately after your arrival?
I am the less surprised at what has happened, replied Sir William, from that knowledge of
what the manners of the great really are, which my situation in life has allowed me
to acquire.
About the court such instances of elegant breeding are not uncommon.
Scarcely anything was talked of the whole day or next morning but their visit to Rosings.
Mr. Collins was carefully instructing them in what they were to expect that the sight
of such rooms, so many servants, and so splendid a dinner, might not wholly overpower them.
When the ladies were separating for the toilette, he said to Elizabeth,
Do not make yourself uneasy, my dear cousin, about your apparel.
Lady Catherine is far from requiring that elegance of dress in us which becomes herself
and her daughter.
I would advise you merely to put on whatever of your clothes is superior to the rest.
There is no occasion for anything more.
Lady Catherine will not think the worse of you for being simply dressed.
She likes to have the distinction of rank preserved.
While they were dressing he came two or three times to their different doors to recommend
their being quick as Lady Catherine very much objected to being kept waiting for her
dinner.
Such formidable accounts of her ladyship and her manner of living quite frightened Mariah
Lucas, who had been little used to company, and she looked forward to her introduction
at Rosings with as much apprehension as her father had done to his presentation at St.
James'.
As the weather was fine they had a pleasant walk of about half a mile across the park.
Every park has its beauty and its prospects, and Elizabeth saw much to be pleased with,
though she could not be in such raptures as Mr. Collins expected the scene to inspire,
and was but slightly affected by his enumeration of the windows in front of the house, and
relation of what the glazing altogether had originally cost Sir Louis de Bourgh.
When they ascended the steps to the hall, Mariah's alarm was every moment increasing,
and even Sir William did not look perfectly calm.
Elizabeth's courage did not fail her.
She had heard nothing of Lady Catherine that spoke of her awful from any extraordinary
talents or miraculous virtue, and the mere stateliness of money or rank she thought she
could witness without trepidation.
From the entrance hall of which Mr. Collins pointed out, with a rapturous air, the fine
proportion and the finished ornaments, they followed the servants through an antechamber
to the room where Lady Catherine, her daughter and Mrs. Jenkinson were sitting.
Her ladyship, with great condescension, arose to receive them, and as Mrs. Collins had settled
it with her husband that the office of introduction should be hers, it was performed in a proper
manner, without any of those apologies and thanks which he would have thought necessary.
In spite of having been at St. James's, Sir William was so completely awed by the grandeur
surrounding him that he had but just courage enough to make a very low bow and take his
seat without saying a word, and his daughter, frightened almost out of her senses, sat on
the edge of her chair, not knowing which way to look.
Elizabeth found herself quite equal to the scene, and could observe the three ladies before
her compositely.
Lady Catherine was a tall, large woman with strongly marked features which might once
have been handsome.
Her air was not conciliating, nor was her manner of receiving them such as to make her
visitors forget their inferior rank.
She was not rendered formidable by silence, but whatever she said was spoken in so authoritative
a tone as marked her self-importance and brought Mr. Wickham immediately to Elizabeth's mind,
and from the observation of the day altogether she believed Lady Catherine to be exactly
what he represented.
When after examining the mother, in whose countenance and deportment she soon found
some resemblance of Mr. Darcy, she turned her eyes on the daughter.
She could almost have joined in Maria's astonishment at her being so thin and so small.
There was neither in figure nor face any likeness between the ladies.
Mr. Berg was pale and sickly, her features, though not plain, were insignificant, and
she spoke very little except in a low voice to Mrs. Jenkinson, in whose appearance there
was nothing remarkable, and who was entirely engaged in listening to what she said and
placing a screen in the proper direction before her eyes.
After sitting a few minutes they were all sent to one of the windows to admire the view,
Mr. Collins attending them to point out its beauties, and Lady Catherine kindly informing
them that it was much better worth looking at in the summer.
The dinner was exceedingly handsome, and there were all the servants and all the articles
of plate which Mr. Collins had promised, and as he had likewise foretold, he took his seat
at the bottom of the table, by her ladyship's desire, and looked as if he felt that life
could furnish nothing greater.
He carved and ate and praised with delighted alacrity, and every dish was commended, first
by him, and then by Sir William, who was now enough recovered to echo whatever his
son-in-law said, in a manner which Elizabeth wondered Lady Catherine could bear.
But Lady Catherine seemed gratified by their excessive admiration, and gave most gracious
smiles, especially when any dish on the table proved a novelty to them.
The party did not supply much conversation.
Elizabeth was ready to speak whenever there was an opening, but she was seated between
Charlotte and Mr. Berg, the former of whom was engaged in listening to Lady Catherine,
and the latter said not a word to her all dinner-time.
Mrs. Jenkinson was chiefly employed in watching how little Mr. Berg ate, pressing her to try
some other dish, and fearing she was indisposed.
Maria thought speaking out of the question, and the gentleman did nothing but eat and
admire.
When the ladies returned to the drawing-room, there was little to be done but to hear Lady
Catherine talk, which she did without any intermission till coffee came in, delivering
her opinion on every subject in so decisive a manner as proved that she was not used to
having her judgment controverted.
She inquired into Charlotte's domestic concerns familiarly and minutely, gave her a great
deal of advice as to the management of them all, told her how everything ought to be regulated
in so small a family as hers, and instructed her as to the care of her cows and her poultry.
Elizabeth found that nothing was beneath this great lady's attention which could furnish
her with an occasion of dictating to others.
In the intervals of her discourse with Mrs. Collins, she addressed a variety of questions
to Maria and Elizabeth, but especially to the latter, of whose connections she knew
the least, and who she observed to Mrs. Collins was a very genteel, pretty sort of girl.
She asked her at different times how many sisters she had, whether they were older or
younger than herself, whether any of them were likely to be married, whether they were
handsome, where they had been educated, what carriage her father kept, and what had been
her mother's maiden name.
Elizabeth felt all the impertinence of her questions, but answered them very composedly.
Lady Catherine then observed,
Otherwise I see no occasion for entailing estates from the female line.
It was not thought necessary in Sir Louis de Bourgh's family.
Do you play and sing, Miss Bennet?
A little.
Oh, then some time or other we shall be happy to hear you.
Our instrument is a capital one, probably superior to...
You shall try it some day.
Do your sisters play and sing?
One of them does.
Why did you not all learn?
You ought all to have learned.
The Miss Webb's all play, and their father has not so good an income as yours.
Do you draw?
No, not at all.
What, none of you?
Not one.
That is very strange.
But I suppose you had no opportunity.
Your mother should have taken you to town every spring for the benefit of masters.
My mother would have had no objection, but my father hates London.
Has your governess left you?
We never had any governess.
No governess?
How is that possible?
Five daughters brought up at home without a governess?
I have never heard of such a thing.
Your mother must have been quite a slave to your education.
Elizabeth could hardly help smiling as she assured her that she had not been the case.
Then who taught you?
Who attended to you?
Without a governess, you must have been neglected.
Compared with some families, I believe we were.
But such of us as wished to learn never wanted the means.
We were always encouraged to read and had all the masters that were necessary.
Those who chose to be idols certainly might.
I, no doubt, but that is what a governess will prevent.
And if I had known your mother, I would have advised her most strenuously to engage one.
I always say that nothing is to be done in education without steady and regular instruction.
And nobody but a governess can give it.
It is wonderful how many families I have been the means of supplying in that way.
I am always glad to get a young person well placed out.
Four nieces of Mrs. Jenkinson's are most delightfully situated through my means,
and it was but the other day that I recommended another young person,
who was merely accidentally mentioned to me, and the family are quite delighted with her.
Mrs. Collins, did I tell you of Lady Metcalfe's calling yesterday to thank me?
She finds Miss Pope a treasure.
Lady Catherine, she said, you have given me a treasure.
Are any of your younger sisters out, Miss Bennet?
Yes, ma'am, all.
All? What? All five out at once?
Very odd. And you only the second.
The younger ones out before the elder ones are married?
Your younger sisters must be very young.
Yes, my youngest is not sixteen.
Perhaps she is a full young to be much in company.
But really, ma'am, I think it would be very hard upon younger sisters
that they should not have their share of society and amusement,
because the elder may not have the means or inclination to marry early.
The last born has as good a right to the pleasures of youth as the first,
and to be kept back on such a motive.
I think it would not be very likely to promote sisterly affection or delicacy of mind.
Upon my words, said her ladyship,
you give your opinion very decidedly for so young a person.
Pray, what is your age?
With three younger sisters grown up, replied Elizabeth, smiling,
your ladyship can hardly expect me to own it.
Lady Catherine seemed quite astonished at not receiving a direct answer,
and Elizabeth suspected herself to be the first creature
who had ever dared to trifle with so much dignified impertinence.
You cannot be more than twenty, I am sure.
Therefore, you need not conceal your age.
I am not one in twenty.
When the gentleman had joined them and tea was over, the card tables were placed.
Lady Catherine, Sir William, and Mr. and Mrs. Collins
sat down to quadrille, and Mrs. de Bourgh chose to play at casino.
The two girls had the honour of assisting Mrs. Jenkinson to make up her party.
Their table was superlatively stupid.
Scarcely a syllable was uttered that did not relate to the game,
except when Mrs. Jenkinson expressed her fears of Mr. Bourgh's being too hot,
or too cold, or having too much or too little light.
A great deal more passed at the other table.
Lady Catherine was generally speaking, stating the mistakes of the three others,
or relating some anecdote of herself.
Mr. Collins was employed in agreeing to everything her ladyship said,
thanking her for every fish he won, and apologizing if he thought he won too many.
Mr. William did not say much.
He was storing his memory with anecdotes and noble names.
When Lady Catherine and her daughter had played as long as they chose,
the tables were broken up, the carriage was offered to Mrs. Collins,
gratefully accepted, and immediately ordered.
The party then gathered round the fire to hear Lady Catherine determine
what weather they were to have on the moral.
From these instructions they were summoned by the arrival of the coach,
and with many speeches of thankfulness on Mr. Collins's side,
and as many bows on Sir William's they departed.
As soon as they'd driven from the door, Elizabeth was called on by her cousin
to give her opinion of all that she had seen at Rosings,
which for Charlotte's sake she made more favourable than it really was.
But her commendation, though costing her some trouble,
could by no means satisfy Mr. Collins,
and he was very soon obliged to take her ladyship's praise into his own hands.
End of chapter 29